'$16.00 fulfil or mind The Theory of Multiple Intelligences With a New Introduction bv the Author Howard Gardner Frames of Mind Other Books by Howard Gardner The Quest for Mind {1973; second edition, 1981) The Arts and Human Development {1973) The Shattered Mind {1975) Developmental Psychology {1978; second edition, 1982) Artful Scribbles {1980) Art, Mind, and Brain {1982) The Mind's New Science {1985) To Open Minds {1989) The Unschooled Mind {1991) Multiple Intelligences {1993) FRAMES OF MIND The Theory of Multiple Intelligences HOWARD GARDNER BasicBooks A Member of The Perseus Books Group Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data Gardner, Howard. Frames of mind. Includes bibliographical references and index. 1. Intellect. I. Title. BF431.G244 1983 153 83-70765 ISBN (M65-02508-0 (cloth) ISBN 0^65-02509-9 (paper) ISBN 0-465-02510-2 (second edition paper) Copyright © 1983 by Howard Gardner. Introduction to second paper edition (tenth-anniversary edition) copyright © 1993 by Howard Gardner. Published by BasicBooks, A Member of The Perseus Books Group All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. No part of this book may be reproduced in any manner whatsoever without written permission except in the case of brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. For information, address BasicBooks, 10 East 53rd Street, New York, NY 10022-5299. Designed by Vincent Torre 00 01 02 03 04 HC 30 29 28 27 26 25 For Ellen CONTENTS INTRODUCTION TO THE TENTH-ANNIVERSARY EDITION IX PREFACE XXVii NOTE ON THE PROJECT ON HUMAN POTENTIAL XXXi Parti Background 1. The Idea of Multiple Intelligences 3 2. Intelligence: Earlier Views 12 3. Biological Foundations of Intelligence 31 4. What Is an Intelligence? 59 Part II The Theory 5. Linguistic Intelligence 73 6. Musical Intelligence 99 7. Logical-Mathematical Intelligence 128 8. Spatial Intelligence 170 9. Bodily-Kinesthetic Intelligence 205 10. The Personal Intelligences 237 11. A Critique of the Theory of Multiple Intelligences 277 12. The Socialization of Human Intelligences through Symbols 299 vii Contents Part III Implications and Applications 13. The Education of Intelligences 331 14. The Application of Intelligences 367 NOTES 395 INDEX 429 viii INTRODUCTION TO THE TENTH-ANNIVERSARY EDITION In his dreams, every author envisions a wonderful career for the book on which he is working. Still, while writing Frames of Mind, I did not anticipate that the book would find a receptive audience in so many circles across so many lands. And I certainly did not expect to have the privilege of introducing a tenth-anniversary edition of the book. While working on Frames of Mind, I viewed it principally as a contribution to my own discipline of developmental psychology and, more broadly, to the behavioral and cognitive sciences. I wanted to broaden conceptions of intelligence to include not only the results of paper-and- pencil tests but also knowledge of the human brain and sensitivity to the diversity of human cultures. Although I discussed the educational implications of the theory in the closing chapters, my eyes were not beamed toward the classroom. In fact, however, the book has exerted considerable influence in educational quarters: my colleagues and I at Harvard Project Zero have undertaken several educational experiments inspired by "MI theory," and there have been numerous other attempts to apply the theory to particular educational environments. In the companion volume to this book—Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice (Gardner 1993)—I review the principal ways in which the theory has entered into contemporary educational discourse. Here, in this new introduction to Frames of Mind (which incorporates portions of the introduction to its first paperback edition in 1985), I have five aims: to summarize the principal themes of Frames of Mind; to situate MI theory within the history of studies of intelligence; to relate Frames of Mind to my more recent work; to respond to some of the prin- rx Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition cipal criticisms leveled at MI theory; and to forecast possible future work. At the end of this introduction are bibliographical references for materials that are not treated further in the book itself. THE PRINCIPAL THEMES OF FRAMES OF MIND At the time I wrote Frames of Mind, I had not fully anticipated the extent to which most people continued to adhere to two assumptions about intelligence: first, that it is a single, general capacity that every human being possesses to a greater or lesser extent; and that, however defined, it can be measured by standardized verbal instruments, such as short-answer, paper-and-pencil tests. In an effort to help new readers to enter the work, and to forestall these widely held but ultimately untenable conceptions, I ask you to perform two thought experiments. First of all, try to forget that you have ever heard of the concept of intelligence as a single property of the human mind, or of that instrument called the intelligence test, which purports to measure intelligence once and for all. Second of all, cast your mind widely about the world and think of all the roles or "end states"—vocational and avocational— that have been prized by cultures during various eras. Consider, for example, hunters, fishermen, farmers, shamans, religious leaders, psychiatrists, military leaders, civil leaders, athletes, artists, musicians, poets, parents, and scientists. Honing in closer, then, consider the three end states with which I begin Frames of Mind: the Puluwat sailor, the Koranic student, and the Parisian composer at her microcomputer. In my view, if we are to encompass adequately the realm of human cognition, it is necessary to include a far wider and more universal set of competences than we have ordinarily considered. And it is necessary to remain open to the possibility that many—if not most—of these competences do not lend themselves to measurement by standard verbal methods, which rely heavily on a blend of logical and linguistic abilities. With such considerations in mind, I have formulated a definition of what I call an "intelligence." An intelligence is the ability to solve problems, or to create products, that are valued within one or more cultural settings—a definition that says nothing about either the sources of these abilities or the proper means of "testing" them. Building upon this definition, and drawing especially on biological and anthropological evidence, I then introduce eight distinct criteria for an intelligence. As set forth in chapter 4, these criteria range from the isolation of a capacity as a result of brain damage to the susceptibility of a capacity to encoding in a symbolic system. Then, in part II of the x Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition book, I describe in detail each of the seven candidate intelligences: the linguistic and logical-mathematical intelligences that are at such a premium in schools today; musical intelligence; spatial intelligence; bodily- kinesthetic intelligence; and two forms of personal intelligence, one directed toward other persons, one directed toward oneself. Following the introduction of the intelligences and a description of their respective modes of operations, I present a critique of the theory in terms of those deficiencies most evident to me at the time of writing. I conclude with some considerations of how intelligences do—and can— develop within a culture, and of how they can be mobilized in various educational settings. When one puts forth a new theory, it is sometimes helpful to indicate the perspectives to which it is most radically opposed. This tack seems especially important in light of the critics who have been unable—or unwilling—to abandon these traditional perspectives. I introduce two exhibits in this regard. First, an advertisement for an intelligence test begins: Need an individual test which quickly provides a stable and reliable estimate of intelligence in 4 or 5 minutes per form? Has three forms? Does not depend on verbal production or subjective scoring? Can be used with the severely physically handicapped (even paralyzed) if they can signal yes-no? Handles two year olds and superior adults within the same short series of times and the same format? and continues in this vein. Whatever might be the value of this test, I can state unequivocally that the description of it implies an illusory wonderland of testing. Furthermore, I am equally suspicious of claims to test intelligence (whatever it might be) by means of reaction-time measures or brain waves. That these measures may well correlate with IQs is, from my perspective, all the more reason for calling IQs into question. My second exhibit comes from a more venerable source—a well- known quotation from Samuel Johnson. The redoubtable doctor once defined "true genius" as "a mind of large general powers, accidentally determined to some particular direction." While I do not question that some people may have the potential to excel in more than one sphere, I strongly challenge the notion of large general powers. To my way of thinking, the mind has the potential to deal with several different kinds of content, but a person's facility with one content has little predictive power about his or her facility with other kinds. In other words, genius (and, a fortiori, ordinary performance) is likely to be specific to particular XI Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition contents: human beings have evolved to exhibit several intelligences and not to draw variously on one flexible intelligence. STUDIES OF INTELLIGENCE As I attempt to situate my own work within the broader history of efforts to conceptualize intelligence, I find it useful to divide the historical continuum into loosely sequential phases: lay theories, the standard psychometric approach, and pluralization and hierarchization. Lay Theories. For most of human history, there was no scientific definition of intelligence. No doubt people spoke often enough about the concept of intelligence and labeled others as more or less "bright," "dull," "clever," or "intelligent." Outstanding figures as diverse as Thomas Jefferson, Jane Austen, Frederick Douglass, or Mahatma Gandhi could all be called "smart." Such informal discussion sufficed in ordinary parlance, but chiefly because people rarely challenged one another on just what was meant by intelligent. The Standard Psychometric Approach. Just about a century ago, psychologists made the first efforts to define intelligence technically and to devise tests that would measure it (see the opening pages of chapter 2). In many ways, these efforts represented an advance and a singular success for scientific psychology. Nonetheless, in light of factors for which the pioneers cannot be blamed, there has been considerable abuse of "IQ testing" on the streets and surprisingly little theoretical advance within the psychometric community proper (Gould 1981). Pluralization and Hierarchization. The first generation of psychologists of intelligence, such as Charles Spearman (1927) and Lewis Terman (1975), tended to believe that intelligence was best conceptualized as a single, general capacity for conceptualization and problem solving. They sought to demonstrate that a group of scores on tests reflected a single underlying factor of "general intelligence." It was probably inevitable that this contention would be challenged; and, over the years, such psychologists as L. L. Thurstone (1960) and J. P. Guilford (1967) argued for the existence of a number of factors, or components, of intelligence. In the broadest sense, Frames of Mind is a contribution to this tradition, although it differs principally in the sources of evidence on which it relies. Whereas most pluralists defend their position by stressing the low correlations among groups of tests, I have based MI theory upon neurological, evolutionary, and cross-cultural evidence. Having posited several components of intelligence, one must then question how and whether they relate to one another. Some scholars, Xli Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition such as Raymond Cattell (1971) and Philip Vernon (1971), argue for a hierarchical relationship among factors, seeing general, verbal, or numerical intelligence as presiding over more specific components. Other scholars, such as Thurstone, however, resist the urge to create a hierarchy of factors, and claim that each should be considered as an equivalent member of a heterarchical structure. These three phases take us up to the publication of Frames of Mind in 1983. In the subsequent decade, I discern at least two new trends: contextualization and distribution. Contextualization. Reflecting a general trend within the behavioral sciences, researchers have become increasingly critical of psychological theories that ignore crucial differences among the contexts within which human beings live and develop. Being a human being in a contemporary postindustrial society is an entirely different matter from being a human being during the Neolithic or the Homeric eras, or, for that matter, from being one who lives in a preliterate or a third world setting today. Rather than assuming that one would possess a certain "intelligence" independent of the culture in which one happens to live, many scientists now see intelligence as an interaction between, on the one hand, certain proclivities and potentials and, on the other, the opportunities and constraints that characterize a particular cultural setting. According to the influential theory of Robert Sternberg (1985), part of intelligence is one's sensitivity to the varying contents around one. In more radical formulations inspired by the work of the Soviet psychologist Lev Vygotsky (1978), some researchers investigate differences among cultures and their practices, rather than differences among individuals (Lave 1988). Distribution. Although the idea of distribution echoes that of contextualization, a "distributed view" focuses on the relation of the person to the things/objects in the immediate environment, rather than on the strictures and values of the larger culture or context. On the traditional "individual-centered" view adhered to in the first three phases of intelligence theory, one's intelligence is carried within one's head; in principle, that intelligence could be measured in isolation. According to the distributed view, however, one's intelligence inheres as much in the artifacts and individuals that surround one as in one's own skull. My intelligence does not stop at my skin; rather, it encompasses my tools (paper, pencil, computer), my notational memory (contained in files, notebooks, journals), and my network of associates (office mates, professional colleagues, others whom I can phone or to whom I can dispatch electronic messages). A forthcoming book, entitled Distributed Cognition, sets forth the principal principles of a distributed view xin Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition (Salomon, in press); see also the useful book Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition published by Lauren Resnick and her colleagues (1991). With the benefit of hindsight, I can point to hints of contextualiza- tion and distribution in the first edition of Frames of Mind. In presenting spatial intelligence, for example, I emphasized the extent to which the expression of that intelligence is determined by the opportunities afforded in various cultures (ranging from sailing to architecture to geometry to chess), and also the value of various tools and notations in enhancing the intelligences of the growing child. Yet, I think it fair to say that in 1983 I centered the multiple intelligences far more within the skull of the single individual in 1983 than I would one decade later. Will intelligence continue to move beyond the brain of the individual into the realm of the artifacts and contexts of the wider culture? A large part of the research community, and particularly that influenced by trends on the European continent or in Asia, would respond yes. From that perspective, the exclusive focus of intelligence on the skills and flexibility of the single individual reflects a peculiarly Anglo- American bias. But those who favor the standard psychometric approach to cognition or intelligence have by no means laid down their disputa- tional weapons. Indeed, in the last decade, there have been renewed efforts to support the traditional views of intelligence and its operation in intelligence tests. Scholars such as Arthur Jensen (1980) and Hans Eysenck (1981) have not only maintained their belief in the singularity of intelligence, but also have supplemented their long-term loyalty to psychometric instruments with fresh enthusiasm about the brain-basis of intelligence. They now contend that intelligence reflects a basic property of the nervous system and can be assessed electrophysiologically, without recourse to paper-and-pencil instruments. A younger colleague, Michael Anderson (1988), has amassed evidence to suggest that such indices of intelligence can be ascertained even among infants. And perhaps most dramatically, Thomas Bouchard and his colleagues (1990) at the University of Minnesota have demonstrated a surprisingly high heritability of psychometric intelligence among a population uniquely situated to provide evidence on this topic: identical twins reared apart. To the extent that the Bouchard-Jensen-Eysenck position is correct, there is really no need to pay attention to cultures, contexts, or distributions of intelligence. What is one to make of this situation, where one part of the "intelligence community" is moving further and further toward social and cultural accounts of intelligence, while another part is amassing evidence of the neurological and genetic basis of intelligence? Can they both be right? xiv Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition I do not see these two research traditions as necessarily on a collision course. It could well be that a certain property of the nervous system— say, speed and flexibility of nerve conduction—is largely inborn and accounts in significant measure for eventual success on certain kinds of paper-and-pencil measures. So far as this is so, the "tough-minded" wing of intelligence studies will continue to be tenable. At the same time, it could well be that the forms in which intelligence is expressed outside a test situation, and that the ways in which human beings carry out roles in their culture, remain indefinitely and illuminatingly varied: here the "tender-minded" approach to intelligence studies will remain an important endeavor. A division of explanatory labor is also conceivable: in a recently published volume, Anderson (1992) stresses the power of the traditional view for illuminating infant cognition, while invoking a multiple intelligences perspective for later development. I anticipate, however, that the "tough" and the "tender" will continue to fight it out, rather than merely agree to divide the intelligence terrain. For example, meeting psychometricians on their own ground, Stephen Ceci (1990) has shown the many ways in which even performance on the simplest kinds of reaction-time measures are subject to training and cultural effects. And, under the label of the "new environ- mentalism," my colleague Robert LeVine (1991) has challenged the inferences drawn from studies of twins reared apart but within the same American ambience. In his view, human environments can differ in a multitude of ways, leading to differences in performance far greater than those observed in twins raised in what are basically variations of a modern Western middle-class environment. FRAMES OF MIND AND MY RECENT WORK As I have indicated, much of the work my colleagues and I have undertaken in the past decade has examined educational implications of MI theory (see Gardner 1993). In particular, we have sought to take into account the various differences in individual profiles of intelligences within an educational setting. Describing an "individual- centered school," we have addressed the ways in which each child's profile of intelligences can be assessed; the ways in which each child can be aligned with curriculum, particularly with reference to the way in which that curriculum is presented to the child; and the ways in which youngsters with particular profiles of intelligence can be matched up appropriately with educational opportunities outside the confines of school. xv Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition A great deal of our recent effort has been expended on the development of means of assessment that are "intelligence-fair": that allow a measurement of intellectual strengths without going through the "lenses" of language and logic, as is required in standard paper-and- pencil measures. At first, we thought it would be possible and desirable to try to measure an individual's intelligence in "pure form," yielding something akin to a seven-pronged intelligence profile. Increasingly, however, as we came to accept the contextualization and distribution perspectives, it seemed ill advised, and perhaps impossible, to attempt to measure the "raw" intelligence. As we now see it, intelligences are always expressed in the context of specific tasks, domains, and disciplines. There is no "pure" spatial intelligence: instead, there is spatial intelligence as expressed in a child's puzzle solutions, route finding, block building, or basketball passing. By the same token, adults do not exhibit their spatial intelligence directly, but are more or less proficient chess players or artists or geometricians. Thus, we are well advised to assess intelligences by watching people who already are familiar with and have some skills in these pursuits, or by introducing individuals to such domains and observing how well one can move beyond the novice stage, with or without specific supports or scaffolding. This shift in philosophy of assessment reflects what is probably the most important conceptual advance in MI theory: the distinction among intelligences, domains, and fields. In the original formulation, these distinctions were not properly drawn, leading to confusion among readers and, not infrequently, within my own thinking. But collaborative work with David Feldman (1980, 1986) and Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi (1988) has provided me with a well-founded taxonomy. At the level of the individual, it is proper to speak about one or more human intelligences, or human intellectual proclivities, that are part of our birthright. These intelligences may be thought of in neurobiolog- ical terms. Human beings are born into cultures that house a large number of domains—disciplines, crafts, and other pursuits in which one can become enculrurated and then be assessed in terms of the level of competence one has attained. While domains, of course, involve human beings, they can be thought of in an impersonal way—because the expertise in a domain can in principle be captured in a book, a computer program, or some other kind of artifact. There is a relation between intelligences and domains, but it is crucial not to confound these two realms. A person with musical intelligence is likely to be attracted to, and to be successful in, the domain of xvi Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition music. But the domain of musical performance requires intelligences beyond the musical (for example, bodily-kinesthetic intelligence and the personal intelligences), just as musical intelligence can be mobilized for domains beyond music in the strict sense (as in dance or in advertising). More generally, nearly all domains require proficiency in a set of intelligences; and any intelligence can be mobilized for use in a wide array of culturally available domains. During socialization, intercourse occurs principally between the individual and the domains of the culture. But once one achieves a certain competence, the field becomes very important. The field—a sociological construct—includes the people, institutions, award mechanisms, and so forth that render judgments about the qualities of individual performances. To the extent that one is judged competent by the field, one is likely to become a successful practitioner; on the other hand, should the field prove incapable of judging work, or should it judge the work as being deficient, then one's opportunity for achievement will be radically curtailed. The trio of intelligence, domain, and field has proved not only useful for unraveling a host of issues raised by MI theory, but also particularly fruitful for studies of creativity. As formulated originally by Csikszent- mihalyi (1988), the felicitous question is: Where is creativity? The answer is that creativity should not be thought of as inhering principally in the brain, the mind, or the personality of a single individual. Rather, creativity should be thought of as emerging from the interactions of three nodes: the individual with his or her own profile of competences and values; the domains available for study and mastery within a culture; and the judgments rendered by the field that is deemed competent within a culture. To the extent that the field accepts innovation, one (or one's work) can be seen as creative; but to the extent that an innovation is rejected, or not understood, or considered not innovative, it is simply invalid to continue to maintain that a product is creative. Of course, in the future, the field may choose to alter its early judgments. Each of the scholars who has worked on this formulation has put it to work distinctively. In my own case, I have defined the creative individual in ways paralleling my definition of intelligence. Specifically, the creative individual is one who regularly solves problems or fashions products in a domain, and whose work is considered both novel and acceptable by knowledgeable members of a field. On the basis of this definition, I have studied six men and one woman who early in this century were instrumental in formulating modern consciousness in the West. Each—Sigmund Freud, Albert Einstein, Igor Stravinsky, Pablo xvu Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition Picasso, T. S. Eliot, Martha Graham, and Mahatma Gandhi—exemplifies one of the seven intelligences (Gardner, in press). Those interested in the evolution of the theory of multiple intelligences since 1983 often ask whether additional intelligences have been added—or original candidates deleted. The answer is that I have elected not to tamper for now with the original list, though I continue to think that some form of "spiritual intelligence" may well exist. It is pertinent to point out that my notions of "intrapersonal intelligence" have shifted somewhat in the last decade. In Frames of Mind, I stressed the extent to which intrapersonal intelligence grew out of, and was organized around, the "feeling life" of the individual. If I were to rework the relevant parts of chapter 10 today, I would stress instead the importance of having a viable model of oneself and of being able to draw effectively upon that model in making decisions about one's life. In addition to work on the educational implications of MI theory, and the extension of that work to the realm of creativity, I have been involved in one other line of study that grows out of MI theory. The positing of different intelligences implies two further considerations: Why do human beings possess particular intelligences, and what are the factors that lead intelligences to develop as they do? Both of these issues lie near the heart of developmental psychology, the discipline in which I was trained. And, as it happens, my own work on intelligence can be seen as part of a general trend in that discipline to consider the different domains or "modules of the mind" (Carey and Gelman 1991; Fodor 1983; Keil 1989). One result of this ongoing research has been the effort to delineate the different constraints at work in the realms of the mind: for example, to indicate the kinds of assumption infants make about the realm of number or causality, the strategies toddlers naturally invoke in learning natural language, the sorts of concepts children easily form as opposed to those that are almost impossible to form. "Constraints" research has revealed that, by the end of early childhood, youngsters have developed powerful and already entrenched theories about their immediate worlds: the world of physical objects and forces; the world of living entities; the world of human beings, including their minds. Surprisingly, and in contradiction to the claims of the great developmentalist Jean Piaget (Mussen and Kessen 1983), these naive "conceptions" and "theories" prove difficult to alter, despite years of schooling. And so it often happens that the "mind of the five-year-old" ends up unaffected by the experiences of school. In The Unschooled Mind (1991), I illustrate the power of these constraints by showing that, in ev- xvm Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition ery area of the curriculum, the mind of the five-year-old continues to hold sway. Taken together, the work on multiple intelligences and the work on the constraints of the mind yield a view of the human being significantly different from the one generally subscribed to a generation ago. In the heyday of the psychometric and behaviorist eras, it was generally believed that intelligence was a single entity that was inherited; and that human beings—initially a blank slate—could be trained to learn anything, provided that it was presented in an appropriate way. Nowadays an increasing number of researchers believe precisely the opposite: that there exists a multitude of intelligences, quite independent of each other; that each intelligence has its own strengths and constraints; that the mind is far from unencumbered at birth; and that it is unexpectedly difficult to teach things that go against early "naive" theories or that challenge the natural lines of force within an intelligence and its matching domains. At first blush, this diagnosis would appear to sound a death knell for formal education. It is hard enough to teach to one intelligence; what about seven? It is hard enough to teach even when anything can be taught; what to do if there are distinct limits and strong constraints on human cognition and learning? In truth, however, psychology does not directly dictate education (Egan 1983); it merely helps one to understand the conditions within which education takes place. One person's limitation can be another person's opportunity. Seven kinds of intelligence would allow seven ways to teach, rather than one. And any powerful constraints that exist in the mind can be mobilized to introduce a particular concept (or a whole system of thinking) in a way that children are most likely to learn it and least likely to distort it. Paradoxically, constraints can be suggestive and ultimately freeing. CRITICISMS OF MI THEORY In the course of a decade of discussion, there have been numerous criticisms of MI theory and numerous opportunities for me to attempt to respond to them. Since some of these criticisms and responses are anticipated in chapter 11, and discussed in Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice, I shall here focus on what I believe to be the most important issues: terminology, correlation among intelligences, intelligence and styles, the processes of intelligences, and the risks of repeating the sins of intelligence testing. xix Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition Terminology. Many individuals, though happy to recognize the existence of different abilities and faculties, balk at the use of the word intelligence. "Talents are fine," they say, "but intelligence should be reserved for more general kinds of capacities." One can, of course, define words in any way one likes. In delineating a narrow definition of intelligence, however, one usually devalues those capacities that are not within that definition's purview: thus, dancers or chess players may be talented but they are not smart. In my view, it is fine to call music or spatial ability a talent, so long as one calls language or logic a talent as well. But I balk at the unwarranted assumption that certain human abilities can be arbitrarily singled out as qualifying as intelligence while others cannot. Correlation among Intelligences. Several critics have reminded me that there are generally positive correlations (the so-called positive manifold) among tests for different faculties (for example, space and language). More generally, within psychology, almost every test of abilities correlates at least a little bit with other tests of ability. This state of affairs gives comfort to those who would posit the existence of "general intelligence." I cannot accept these correlations at face value. Nearly all current tests are so devised as to call principally on linguistic and logical faculties. Often the very wording of the question can tip off the test takers. Accordingly, a person with the skills important for success on such instruments is likely to do relatively well even in tests of musical or spatial abilities, while one who is not especially facile linguistically or logically is likely to be impaired on such standard tests, even if one has skills in the areas that are allegedly being tested. The truth is that we do not yet know how far various intelligences (or, as I would now say, instantiations of various intelligences) actually correlate. We do not know whether someone who has the intelligences to be a good chess player or architect also has the intelligences to succeed in music or mathematics or rhetoric. And we will not know until we have devised means of assessment that are intelligence-fair. At such a time, we may well find certain correlations among intelligences, and such findings would naturally result in a redrawing of the map of human cognition. I would be very surprised, however, if most of the intelligences I have defined in this book were to disappear in the new cartography—but far less so at the emergence of new intelligences or sub-intelligences. Intelligences and Styles. Many individuals have pointed out that my list of intelligences resembles lists put out by researchers interested in xx Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition learning styles, working styles, personality styles, human archetypes, and the like; and asked what is new in my formulation. Without question, there will be overlap between these lists, and I may well be trying to get at some of the same dimensions as those in the "styles" world. Still, three aspects of my theory are indeed distinctive. First of all, I arrived at the seven intelligences by a method I believe to be unique: the synthesis of significant bodies of scientific evidence about development, breakdown, brain organization, evolution, and other kindred concepts (see chapter 4). Most other lists are a consequence either of the correlations among test scores or of empirical observations—for example, of students in school. Second, my intelligences are specifically linked to content. I claim that human beings have particular intelligences because of informational contents that exist in the world—numerical information, spatial information, information about other people. Most stylistic accounts are assumed to cut across content: thus, one is said to be impulsive or analytic or emotive "across the board." Third, rather than being analogous to (or even redundant with) styles, intelligences may well need to cross-cut other kinds of analytic categories. Perhaps styles are intelligence-specific, or intelligences are style-specific. There is, in fact, empirical evidence on this issue. In our educational effort with young children called Project Spectrum (Gardner and Viens 1990), we have found that certain "working styles" prove to be quite content-specific. The same child who is reflective or engaged with one content can turn out to be impulsive or inattentive with another content. Just why this occurs we do not know; but it cautions against an easy assumption that styles are independent of content, or that intelligences can be collapsed with styles. The Processes of Intelligences. Several sympathetic critics did not question the existence of several intelligences but criticized me for being purely descriptive. From their vantage point, it is the job of the psychologist to lay out the processes whereby mental activity is carried out. I concede that the work in Frames of Mind is largely descriptive. I believe that such description is an appropriate place to begin—to make the case for a plurality of intelligences. Certainly nothing in the work in any way blocks the path toward an exploration of the processes whereby the intelligences operate; and indeed, at various points in this volume, I offer suggestions about what processes and operations might be entailed in spatial, musical, and other intelligences. It is perhaps worth mentioning that, at the time Frames was published, most psychologists believed that human information processing xxi Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition was best explained by the serial von Neumann computer. Within a few years, that allegiance had completely changed, and the so-called parallel- distributed processing approach was thought to be a superior way of explicating human (and artificial) cognition (see Gardner 1987). Perhaps it was just as well that, in 1983, I inadvertently refrained from offering a detailed processing characterization of each intelligence since, by 1990, such an account would have been considered deeply flawed. Still, since advances in science can come about only through the positing of detailed models that can be tested, refined, and refuted, I welcome efforts to "model" the different intelligences and to figure out how they work together. Repeating the Sins of Intelligence Testing. Many critics of intelligence and intelligence testing believe that, far from slaying the dragon, I have equipped it with additional horns or sharpened teeth. In their pessimistic view, seven intelligences are even worse than one: people can now feel inadequate across a whole ensemble of realms; and this taxonomy can be used further to stigmatize individuals and groups ("Johnny is bodily-kinesthetic"; "Sally is only linguistic"; "All girls are better in X than in Y"; "This ethnic group excels in M intelligence, while this racial group is better in N intelligence"). To these critics, let me say at once that MI theory was devised as a scientific theory and not as an instrument of social policy. Like any other theory, it can be put to different uses by different people; it is not possible, and may not be appropriate, for the originator of a theory to attempt to control the ways in which it is used. Nonetheless, I am personally opposed to the misuses implied in these criticisms. I do not think that the abuses of intelligence testing ought in any sense to be imported to multiple intelligences theory. Indeed, I do not believe that it is possible to assess intelligences in pure form, and the kinds of assessment I favor are entirely different from those associated with IQ testing. I discourage efforts to characterize individuals or groups as exhibiting one or another profile of intelligences. While at any moment a person or a group might exhibit certain intelligences, this picture is fluid and changing. Indeed, the very lack of a developed intelligence of one sort can serve as a motivation for the development of that intelligence. In focusing in chapter 14 on the Suzuki method of musical education, I wanted to demonstrate that a society's decision to invest significant resources into the development of a particular intelligence can make the entire society quite intelligent in that respect. Far from believing that intelligences are set in stone, I believe that they are subject to being consid- xxii Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition erably modified by changes in available resources and, for that matter, in one's perceptions of one's own abilities and potentials (Dweck and Licht 1980). The more one believes in the contextual and distributed views of intelligence, the less sense it makes to posit inherent limits on intellectual achievement. I am sometimes asked whether I feel upset or betrayed by people who put my theory or concepts to uses I do not personally favor. Of course, such practices make me uneasy—but I cannot take responsibility for the uses or misuses to which my ideas are put by anyone who encounters them in the marketplace. Still, if someone who has worked with me were to apply the ideas in a way I could not endorse, I would ask him or her to develop a separate terminology and to desist from relating the work to my own. FUTURE WORK I assume that there will be continued give-and-take on the controversial aspects of MI theory; I hope for continued theoretical progress as well. For that progress I look chiefly to my students, who have already carried the work forward in ways that I admire (for example, Granott and Gardner, in press; Hatch and Gardner, in press; Kornhaber, Krechevsky, and Gardner 1990). There is little question that educational work will continue to be carried out in the tradition of MI theory. Indeed, that work appears to be expanding with every month. I can no longer keep track of what is being done, let alone evaluate its quality. In Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice, I have attempted to assess the state of the art at the present time. I expect to add to the set of educationally oriented writings assembled there; and I will also continue to serve as a clearinghouse for information about experiments and projects being carried out in an MI vein. Any future work that I may do, building on the work described here, is likely to take on four forms: 1. Studies of the diverse contexts in which intelligences develop and of the ways in which they develop in those contexts. I have already carried out a detailed case study of intellectual options in another culture, the People's Republic of China (Gardner 1989); and, with several other colleagues, I am carrying out research on intelligence in the particular context of school (Gardner et al., in press). 2. Studies of the phenomena of human creativity and how best to enhance it. In my current project on creators of the modern era, I am developing xxiii Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition a method whereby it should be possible to study the nature of creative work across domains. In so doing, I am investigating the role played by different intelligences, and by different combinations of intelligences, in human creative achievement of the highest order. While building on MI theory, this focus on creativity expands the theory in several respects. Creativity depends upon more than intelligence: it involves personality factors in respect to the individual and domain and field factors at work in the larger society. 3. An examination of the ethical dimensions of human intelligences. Intelligences by themselves are neither prosocial nor antisocial. Goethe used his linguistic intelligence for positive ends, Goebbels, his for destructive ones; Stalin and Gandhi both understood other individuals, but put their interpersonal intelligences to diverse uses. I am interested in two ethical dimensions of human intelligence. First, how can we ensure that every human being develops to the fullest his or her intellectual potentials? Second, how can we help to ensure the use of those intelligences for positive ends rather than for destructive ones? Both of these issues involve questions of policy and of "social engineering"— domains as new for me as they are treacherous. Yet, well into middle age, I feel a responsibility at least to consider these issues. 4. A consideration of leadership for our times. It has become a truism that ours is an era devoid of heroes and bereft of leadership. My own view is that we have a plentiful supply of leaders within domains: men and women who can, by dint of their achievements, supply leadership for scholarly disciplines, for the arts, for business, or for other technical areas. But we desperately lack leadership for the wider society: people who are able to speak (and to be heard) across interest groups and distinct areas of technical expertise and to address the broad concerns of society, and even of humanity as a whole. I may have identified one reason for this apparent asynchrony. To provide leadership in a domain that highlights a certain intelligence, the principal requirement is that one excel in that intelligence: other people in that domain will come readily to follow this leader's example and to listen to what he or she has to say (or to watch what he or she does). We might say workers within a domain already share a common discourse. In the wider society, however, that person has no automatic, built-in way of attracting followers. Rather, a would-be leader must be able to create a story about that society—a persuasive narrative that accounts for his or her place within it and one that can link individuals of different intelligences, domains, and allegiances in a more incorporative enterprise. xxiv Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition Just where successful leadership lies is a subject for another day— though one, I hope, not too far in the future. It is clear to me that the issue of leadership will—indeed, must—go beyond multiple intelligences. It will involve capacities not dealt with in the present book— capacities that cut across intelligences and affect other people in ways that may be as emotional and social as they are cognitive. While from my present vantage point the best way to start to understand the human mind is to examine its different frames, its separate intelligences, in the end we must also learn how to yoke those intelligences together and mobilize them for constructive ends. Cambridge, Massachusetts November 1992 References Anderson, M. 1988. "Inspection Time, Information Processing, and the Development of Intelligence." British Journal of Developmental Psychology 6:43-57. Anderson, M. 1992. Intelligence and Development: A Cognitive Theory. New York: Blackwell Publishers. Bouchard, T. et al. 1990. "Sources of Human Psychological Differences: The Minnesota Study of Twins Reared Apart." Science 250:223-28. Carey, S.; and Gelman, R. 1991. The Epigenesis of Mind. Hillsdale, N.J.: Lawrence Erlbaum. Cattell, R. 1971. Abilities: Their Structure, Growth, and Action. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. Ced, S. 1990. On Intelligence . . . More or Less. Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. Csikszentmihalyi, M. 1988. "Society, Culture, and Person: A Systems View of Creativity." In R. J. Sternberg, ed., The Nature of Creativity. New York: Cambridge University Press. Dweck, C; and Licht, B. G. 1980. "Learned Helplessness and Intellectual Achievement." In J. Garber and M. E. P. Seligman, eds., Human Helplessness: Theory and Applications. New York: Academic Press. Egan, K. 1983. Education and Psychology: Plato, Piaget, and Scientific Psychology. New York: Teachers College Press. Eysenck, H. J. 1981. The Intelligence Controversy. New York: John Wiley. Feldman, D. 1980. Beyond Universals in Cognitive Development. Norwood, N.J.: Ablex. Feldman, D.; with Goldsmith, L. 1986. Nature's Gambit. New York: Basic Books. Fodor, J. 1983. The Modularity of Mind. Cambridge: MIT Press. Gardner, H. 1987. Introduction to the paperback edition of The Mind's New Science. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. 1989. To Open Minds: Chinese Clues to the Dilemma of Contemporary Education. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. 1991. The Unschooled Mind: How Children Think and How Schools Should Teach. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. 1993. Multiple Intelligences: The Theory in Practice. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H. In press. The Creators of the Modern Era. New York: Basic Books. Gardner, H.; Sternberg, R.; Krechevsky, M.; and Okagaki, L. In press. "Intelligence in Context: Enhancing Students' Practical Intelligence for School." In K. McGUly, ed.. Classroom Lessons: Integrating Cognitive Theory and Classroom Practice. Cambridge: Bradford Books/MIT Press. XXV Introduction to the Tenth-Anniversary Edition Gardner, H.; and Viens, J. 1990. "Multiple Intelligences and Styles: Partners in Effective Education." The Clearinghouse Bulletin: Learning/Teaching Styles and Brain Behavior 4(2):4-5 (Seattle, Wash.: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development). Gould, S. J. 1981. The Mismeasure of Man. New York: W. W. Norton. Granott, N.; and Gardner, H. In press. "When Minds Meet: Interactions, Coincidence, and Development in Domains of Ability." In R. J. Sternberg and R. K. Wagner, eds., Mind in Context: Interactionist Perspectives on Human Intelligence. New York: Cambridge University Press. Guilford, J. P. 1967. The Nature of Human Intelligence. New York: McGraw-Hill. Hatch, T.; and Gardner, H. In press. "Finding Cognition in the Classroom: An Expanded View of Human Intelligence." In G. Salomon, ed.. Distributed Cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press. Jensen, Arthur. 1980. Bias in Mental Testing. New York: Free Press. Keil, F. 1989. Concepts, Kinds, and Cognitive Development. Cambridge: Bradford Books/MIT Press. Kornhaber, M.; Krechevsky, K.; and Gardner, H. 1990. "Engaging Intelligence." Educational Psychologist 25(3,4):177-99. Krechevsky, M.; and Gardner, H. 1990. "The Emergence and Nurturance of Multiple Intelligences." In M. J. A. Howe, ed.. Encouraging the Development of Exceptional Abilities and Talents. Leicester, England: British Psychological Society. Lave, J. 1988. Cognition in Practice. New York: Cambridge University Press. LeVine, R. 1991. "Social and Cultural Influences on Child Development." Paper delivered at the Centennial of Education at Harvard. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Graduate School of Education. Mussen, P.; and Kessen, W., eds. 1983. Handbook of Child Psychology. Vol. 1. New York: John Wiley. Resnick, L.; Levine, J.; and Teasley, S. D., eds. 1991. Perspectives on Socially Shared Cognition. Washington, D.C.: American Psychological Association. Salomon, G. In press. Distributed Cognition. New York: Cambridge University Press. Spearman, C. 1927. The Abilities of Man: Their Nature and Measurements. New York: Mac- millan. Sternberg, R. 1985. Beyond IQ. New York: Cambridge University Press. Terman, L. M. 1975 [first published in 1916], The Measurement of Intelligence. New York: Arno Press. Thurstone, L. L. 1960. The Nature of Intelligence. Littlefield: Adams. Vernon, P. 1971. The Structure of Human Abilities. London: Methuen. Vygostsky, L. 1978. Mind in Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. XXVI PREFACE As indicated in the following note about the Project on Human Potential, this book had an unusual genesis. It came to be written because of the foresight and generosity of a foundation that sought clarification of a concept in its charter—"human potential." The executive director of the foundation, Willem Welling, and the chairman of the board of directors, Oscar van Leer, conceived of a project to investigate human potential and asked several of us at the Graduate School of Education at Harvard to respond to their daunting challenge. The project drew together a group of colleagues from diverse backgrounds who have had the chance to collaborate over the past four years. The story of that collaboration will be related elsewhere, but it is germane to record that it has enabled me to range more broadly and to reflect more probingly about a gamut of issues than I could have done without the flexible support of the van Leer Foundation. My first and greatest debt is to Willem Welling, Oscar van Leer, and their associates at the Bernard van Leer Foundation. I wish to thank my senior colleagues on the Project on Human Potential—Gerald Lesser, Robert LeVine, Israel Scheffler, and Merry White—for their continuous and continuing stimulation, constructive criticism, and support. Our interactions have genuinely changed the way in which I think about many issues and have helped materially with the writing and rewriting of this book. From the first, I have been blessed with incredibly talented, insightful, and hard-working research assistants, and I want to thank them individually and mention their area of contribution to this study: Lisa Brooks (genetics), Linda Levine (psychology), Susan McConnell (neurobiology), Susan Pollak (history and philosophy), William Skryzniarz (international develop- xxvii Preface ment), and Claudia Strauss (anthropology). In a day when scholarship is little esteemed among talented young persons, they have shown exemplary independence and dedication: I am pleased that they are all pursuing careers in the world of scholarship. Other members of the Project to whom I am indebted in various ways include Leonie Gordon, Margaret Herzig, Francis Keppel, Harry Lasker, and Lois Taniuchi. For their generous administrative support, I wish to thank Deans Paul Ylvisaker and Blenda Wilson and, more recently, Deans Patricia Graham and Jerome Murphy. While, in the first instance, this book is a report on human potentials as viewed from a psychological perspective, it also represents an effort to pull together findings from two lines of research which I have been pursuing over the past dozen years. One line is the development, in normal and gifted children, of symbol-using capacities, particularly in the arts—a line I have been carrying out at Harvard Project Zero. The other has been the breakdown of cognitive capacities in individuals suffering from brain damage, which I have been pursuing at the Boston Veterans Administration Medical Center and the Boston University School of Medicine. A conception of different intelligences—the "frames of mind" of my title—has emerged as the most appropriate and comprehensive way of conceptualizing the human cognitive capacities whose development and breakdown I have been studying. I am grateful to have the opportunity to present in this volume the theoretical framework that has emerged from these efforts at synthesis, and to offer some tentative suggestions about the educational implications of the framework. And I want to take this opportunity to thank the various agencies that have generously supported my research over ten years: The Veterans Administration, which granted me a sabbatical so that I could concentrate on this synthesis; the Department of Neurology of Boston University School of Medicine, the Medical Research Division of the Veterans Administration, and the National Institute of Neurological Diseases, Communication Disorders and Stroke, all of which have supported my work in neuropsychology; and, for their support of the work of my colleagues and me at Harvard Project Zero on normal and gifted children, the Spencer Foundation, the Carnegie Corporation, the Markle Foundation, the National Science Foundation, and the National Institute of Education. A large debt is owed to that innovative institution the MacArthur Foundation, which furnished me much needed security during a perilous period for researchers in the social sciences. I want finally to express my appreciation to those individuals who have made particular contributions to this book. A number of my col- xxviii Preface leagues read the entire manuscript, or large sections of it, and offered extremely helpful comments. I wish to record my appreciation to Tom Carothers, Michael Cole, Yadin Dudai, David Feldman, Norman Geschwind, Linda Levine, David Olson, Susan McConnell, Sidney Strauss, William Wall, and Ellen Winner. Dolly Appel served as principal word processor and supervisor of the preparation of the physical manuscript and did so in a skillful, helpful, and cheerful manner which I greatly admired. Jasmine Hall generously offered to prepare the index. Linda Levine aided me with numerous aspects of the physical and conceptual manuscript and undertook with great ingenuity and energy the preparation of the extensive reference notes. I don't know what I would have done without her intelligences! And as with my two most recent books, my colleagues at Basic Books were an unfailing source of support: I especially thank my editor Jane Isay and her assistant Mary Kennedy, as well as Judith Griessman, Janet Halverson, Phoebe Hoss, Lois Shapiro, and Vincent Torre—and the proofreader, Pamela Dailey. I wish to thank the following individuals and publishers for permitting me to reproduce copyrighted materials: To Dr. Roger N. Shepard for permission to reproduce the spatial rotation figure from R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, "Mental Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects," Science, Vol. 171, pp. 701-703, Fig. 1, 19 February 1971. To Academic Press for permission to reproduce a drawing by Nadia from L. Selfe, Nadia: A Case of Extraordinary Drawing Ability in an Autistic Child, 1977. To the American Association for the Advancement of Science for permission to reproduce the spatial rotation figure from R. N. Shepard and J. Metzler, "Mental Rotation of Three-Dimensional Objects," Science, Vol. 171, pp. 701-703, Fig. 1, 19 February 1971. To Harper & Row for permission to quote material from Kenneth Clark, Another Part of the Wood: A Self-Portrait, 1974. To John Murray Publishers, Ltd. for permission to quote material from Kenneth Clark, Another Part of the Wood: A Self-Portrait, 1974. To A. D. Peters & Company for permission to quote passages from Stephen Spender, The Making of a Poem, 1955. Cambridge, Massachusetts June 1983 XXIX NOTE ON THE PROJECT ON HUMAN POTENTIAL The Bernard van Leer Foundation of The Hague, Netherlands, is an international nonprofit institution dedicated to the cause of disadvantaged children and youth. It supports innovative projects that develop community approaches to early childhood education and child care, in order to help disadvantaged children to realize their potential. In 1979, the foundation asked the Harvard Graduate School of Education to assess the state of scientific knowledge concerning human potential and its realization. Proceeding from this general directive, a group of scholars at Harvard has over the past several years been engaged in research exploring the nature and realization of human potential. Activities sponsored by the Project on Human Potential have included reviews of relevant literature in history, philosophy, and the natural and social sciences, a series of international workshops on conceptions of human development in diverse cultural traditions, and the commissioning of papers and books. The principal investigators of the Project represent a variety of fields and interests. Gerald S. Lesser, who chaired the Project's steering committee, is an educator and developmental psychologist, a principal architect in the creation of educational television programs for children. Howard Gardner is a psychologist who has studied the development of symbolic skills in normal and gifted children, and the impairment of such skills in brain-damaged adults. Israel Scheffler is a philosopher who has worked in the areas of philosophy of education, philosophy of science, and philosophy of language. Robert LeVine, a social anthropologist, has worked in subsaharan Africa and Mexico, studying family life, xxxi Note on the Project on Human Potential child care, and psychological development. Merry White is a sociologist and Japan specialist who has studied education, formal organizations, and the roles of women in the Third World and Japan. This wide range of interests and disciplines enabled the Project to take a multifaceted approach to issues of human potential. The first volume published under the aegis of the Project is Howard Gardner's Frames of Mind, a study of human intellectual potentials which draws not only on psychological research but also on the biological sciences and on findings about the development and use of knowledge in different cultures. The second book of the Project to appear is Israel Scheffler's Of Human Potential, which treats philosophical aspects of the concept of potential. Sketching the background of the concept and placing it in the context of a general theory of human nature, this treatment then proposes three analytical reconstructions of the concept and offers systematic reflections on policy and the education of policy makers. The third volume is Human Conditions: The Cultural Basis of Educational Development, by Robert A. LeVine and Merry I. White. Emphasizing the crucial role of cultural factors in the progress of human development, the book offers new models for development based on the social anthropology of the lifespan and the social history of family and school. To provide background for the study of diversity in development, the Project established teams of consultants in Egypt, India, Japan, Mexico, the People's Republic of China, and West Africa. Selected papers presented by these consultants in Project workshops appear in The Cultural Transition: Human Experience and Social Transformations in the Third World and Japan, a fourth volume, edited by Merry I. White and Susan Pollak. Representatives of international development agencies were also engaged as consultants and correspondents over the five-year period of the Project. Through such international dialogue and research, the Project has sought to create a new multidisciplinary environment for understanding human potential. xxxii Parti Background 1 The Idea of Multiple Intelligences A J. V YOUNG GIRL spends an hour with an examiner. She is asked a number of questions that probe her store of information (Who discovered America? What does the stomach do?), her vocabulary (What does nonsense mean? What does belfry mean?), her arithmetic skills (At eight cents each, how much will